29/10/2021
Typescript:- it is superset of javascript.
           - it strict type language
           -it is compile language 

s/w prerequit 
1.nodejs : it provide environment to execute typescript code.
2.npm(node package maqnager): it is repository,by using it we can install external or thired party module.
3.typescript compiler.
4.editor(vs).

node -v // check nodejs 
npm -v // check npm
tsc -v // to check ts 

npm install -g typescript  // to install typescript 

*how to execute ts file 
step-1: compile ts file => tsc filename.ts (after successfully compilation it conver it into plain js file)
step-2: execute js file => node filename.js 

*Data types in typescript 
1.number
2.string
3.boolean
4.array
5.tupple
6.enum
7.union 
8.any

*oops concept 
1.class:it is collection of data member and member function and constructor.
         -class must start with capital letter.it is also called as user define datatype
   -this=> this keyword represent current.      
2.object: it os instance of class.creating class object we can access class data memeber outside.
   -constructor: it is special member function of class,it invoke when an onject of class initialize.
                -in js constructor name must constructor only. 

3.abstraction:hidding unneccessary data from user.
     public: it will accessible everywhere in programe.
     protected: it will allow us to access class property  methode in same class as well as in child only not outside class
     private: it allow us to access class property and methode in same class not in child class or outside class.      

4.encapsulation: wrapping data into single unit.

5.inheritance:accessing property and methode from parent to child class,
if you want to acces property from parent to child we exnted keyword.
 - super(): it represent parent class constructor in child constructor and it must be first statment in child constructor.
6.polymorphism : it is ability to more than one form 

7.interface:it is signature of class. it has constant fiels and abstract methode.it has child whoe is responsible for 
 implenting interface.

*get and set methode: if we want to modify private data for that we use get and set.
                     - get and set methode must have same name in programe.
                     if you want to compile get and set methide programe then use fallowing command
                      tsc -t es5 filename.ts     

*Module concept: in this we can access property  ,class ,or data from one file to another 
                - for that we use import and export.





